Cap Analysis of Gene Expression (CAGE) experimental protocol has emerged as a powerful experimental technique for assisting in the identification of transcription start sites (TSSs). There is strong evidence that CAGE also identifies capping sites along various other locations of transcribed loci such as splicing byproducts, alternative isoforms and capped molecules overlapping introns and exons. We present ADAPT-CAGE, a Machine Learning framework which is trained to distinguish between CAGE signal derived from TSSs and transcriptional noise. ADAPT-CAGE provides highly accurate and single-nucleotide resolution experimentally derived TSSs on a genome-wide scale. It has been specifically designed aiming for flexibility and ease-of-use by only requiring aligned CAGE data and the underlying genomic sequence. When compared to existing algorithms, ADAPT-CAGE exhibits improved performance on every benchmark that we designed based on both annotation- and experimentally-driven strategies. This performance boost brings ADAPT-CAGE in the spotlight as a computational framework that is able to assist in the refinement of gene regulatory networks, the incorporation of accurate information of gene expression regulators and alternative promoter usage in both physiological and pathological conditions.
Introduction
Cap Analysis of Gene Expression (CAGE) was initially introduced in 2003 [1] as a novel method specifically developed to capture and quantify 5’ ends of capped RNAs. http://www.home.pl/airport  During the last decade, CAGE has been continuously refined and improved into its current mature form as a well-established protocol for the identification of transcription start sites (TSS) and promoter regions of transcribed loci. The FANTOM Consortium [2] has extensively applied CAGE on hundreds of tissues and cell-lines to produce a high-quality annotation of the human and mouse promoterome and characterize regulatory mechanisms of gene expression.
Despite its increasing popularity as an experimental promoter identification protocol, the specificity of CAGE regarding the identification of transcription initiation events in the genome has several limitations. There is strong evidence [3–5] that besides promoter regions, CAGE also identifies capping sites along various locations of transcribed loci such as different splicing products, isoforms and capped molecules that can be summed up as transcriptional noise. As a result, only a portion of regions enriched in CAGE signal were found to overlap with the surrounding region of annotated TSSs.
This poses a significant hindrance to research studies that aim to integrate regulatory regions into the framework of biological pathways. During the last decade, several in silico methodologies have been developed to provide basic pipelines for analyzing CAGE datasets and to facilitate peak identification and annotation. Paraclu [6] performs clustering of CAGE tags into wider regions based on a density parameter that reflects the trade-off between size and number of overlapping reads. Within clusters, a score that represents the likelihood of being a transcription initiation site is derived from the analysis of surrounding genomic sequence using a position-specific Markov Model trained on k-mer frequencies. RECLU [7] is an adaptation of Paraclu algorithm that is able to handle replicated (max two replicates) experiments based on the irreproducible discovery rate (IDR) algorithm [8] and utilizes slightly modified parameters to filter the final results when compared against the original implementation. CAGEr is the most recent in silico framework for CAGE analysis and TSS identification [9]. CAGEr applies quality filtering, and depending on the utilized protoco http://army.addtoany.com/arithmetic/bedroom l, removes the 5′ end G nucleotide bias. It subsequently clusters reads into groups and is able to handle multiple CAGE experiments, detect differential TSS usage while addressing the in-between tissue variability in TSS choice and promoter shifting. The common denominator between all the aforementioned implementations is that they can be applied directly on aligned CAGE reads and do not require any additional input such as DNA sequence or other in silico or experimentally derived features.
Despite the important advances in the development of CAGE analysis pipelines, it is evident that existing implementations still include a high number of false positive rate on TSS identification in CAGE datasets. In various older studies, unique structural features were found to be associated with promoter regions [10–13]. In a recent study [10], the structural properties of DNA in promoter regions were investigated by analyzing 13 features including duplex disrupt energy, duplex free energy, bending stiffness, denaturation, stacking energy, bendability, propeller twist, z-DNA, A-philicity, nucleosome positioning, protein deformation, B-DNA twist and protein-DNA twist. Based on structural models derived from a wide array of biochemical experiments, sequences around transcription initiation events from DBTSS (positive set) were converted into numerical vectors and compared against their shuffled counterparts (negative set). It was shown that there are distinct patterns of structural DNA features that can distinguish between promoter and n http://www.ustream.tv/ on-promoter regions. Based on these observations we hypothesized that the same features and their promoter patterns should be able to facilitate the classification of CAGE tag-clusters between real TSSs and transcriptional noise. 
In this stu http://www.purevolume.com/ dy, we present ADAPT-CAGE, a versatile computational framework for analyzing CAGE data providing highly accurate and single-nucleotide resolution experimentally derived TSSs on a genome-wide scale. The proposed algorithm (Figure 1) introduces a novel approach for distinguishing CAGE tag-clusters that represent transcription initiation events from clusters that are formulated due to recapping events, byproducts of the splicing machinery as well as transcriptional and/or sequencing noise. ADAPT-CAGE can be directly applied to aligned CAGE reads, however, in contrast to existing implementations, it is also based on structural and promoter-associated motif features extracted from the underlying DNA sequence. Initially, CAGE tags are filtered based on their mapping quality and 5’ ends of the remaining reads are combined into peaks if they are located closer than a user-specified number of base pairs. Peaks are further filtered if the expression level is lower than a cutoff defined by the user. For each CAGE peak, the normalized number of overlapping reads is computed and the representative nucleotide is selected based on the localization of CAGE tag 5’ ends. The algorithm strategically utilizes sequence and structural DNA properties that have been previously [10] associated to transcription initiation and Polymerase II promoter regions. Based on the sequence surrounding http://twitter.com/#bed  each representative TSS, ADAPT-CAGE extracts sequence and structural DNA features which are then forwarded into a multilayered Machine Learning module. This module is based on Support Vector Machines (SVM) and Stochastic Gradient Boosting (SGB) models individually trained on each DNA feature and subsequently combined with an agent assembly strategy. 
Results
Genome-wide assessment of FANTOM CAGE tag cluster quality, pre- and post-ADAPT-CAGE application
There is increasing evidence in the literature [5,14] that unveils CAGE’s property to detect recapping events, alternative isoforms and in some cases, post-transcriptional processing and cleavage by RNA binding proteins, in addition to transcription initiat http://www.mediafire.com/ ion events. To showcase the aforementioned properties, we adopted [cite Tcf7 paper] an unsupervised exploratory strategy on a genome-wide scale utilizing ChIP-Seq data against H3K4me3, H3K4me1, H3K27ac, H3K27me3, H3K9me3 and H3K36me3. These histone marks are traditionally used to characterize chromatin states in landmark studies and projects such as Roadmap Epigenomics [15]. The idea behind this approach is to group CAGE enriched regions based on the surrounding chromatin state, before and after the application of ADAPT-CAGE, aiming to highlight the noise embedded into raw CAGE signal and the algorithm’s ability to effectively remove it.
To this end, 65,141 CAGE peaks/tag-clusters in H9 cells were extracted from FANTOM repository. Tag-clusters located closely to one-another (less than 1kb), thus belonging in the same promoter region, were merged into a unique event. The position with the highest coverage of reads was selected as a representative, resulting in 31,912 transcription initiation events. The occupancy of each histone mark was calculated in their surrounding region (+/- 1kb). The histone mark enrichment formed the basis for clustering these regions into groups with similar patterns of chromatin activity. Normalized signal profiles were also added as a visual aid. In Figures 2A and 2B, two active loci (SEMA4C and TMEM131) are shown along with the normalized CAGE, ChIP- and DNase-Seq signal depicting different types of activity. In both cases, DNase-Seq and H3K4me3 ChIP-Seq data indicate that both promoters are accessible and CAGE shows that the two genes are expressed. We can observe numerous CAGE enriched regions in their exons and introns, especially in the case of TMEM131 whose length is above 200kb. 
Similar activity patterns are also observed on the genome-wide scale (Figure 2C). There are two major chromatin modes around CAGE enriched loci. Most of them (61.3%, 19,552) exhibit, as expected, a medium to strong enrichment in DNase- and histone marks ChIP-Seq related to active promoters/enhancers. The remaining loci (38,7%, 12,360) in clusters 2, 4 and 8, do not exhibit enrichment in DNase-seq signal nor in any of the histone marks. Evidently, the members of cluster 2, 4 and 8 represent the previously described noise embedded into raw CAGE signal, since the activity http://free13runpool.com/  of these genomic regions is not supported by chromatin activity related experimental data. These findings are in tandem with the evidence  http://www.uol.com.br/blade/activity from the literature, highlighting the significant enrichment of CAGE datasets in signal that corresponds to transcriptional noise. 
The question that arises is how the p http://arm.booking.com/baseball.aspx#bikes icture of the chromatin landscape around the aforementioned CAGE enriched regions changed after applying ADAPT-CAGE. The last layer of the ADAPT-CAGE architecture consists of an SGB model that provides a probabilistic final output score (Figure 1B). Based on the probabilistic nature of ADAPT-CAGE’s final score, we considered 0.5 as a reasonable cutoff for generating positive and negative predictions. From the initial set of regions (N=31,912), 17,850 loci passed (Supplementary Figure 2A) and 14,062 were scored below the cutoff (Supplementary Figure 2B). The vast majority (97.1%, 17,335 out of 17,850) of the positively scored CAGE enriched regions exhibit medium or strong enrichment in histone modifications signal of active transcription. Cluster 9 consisting of only 515 regions is the only group that is not enriched in such signal. In contrast, 9,624 out of 14,062 (clusters 2, 5, 7, 8, 9 and 10 in Supplementary Figure 2B) loci that failed to pass the ADAPT-CAGE score cutoff do not exhibit any enrichment in active transcription signal, while the remaining 4,438 presents medium to strong activity. 
The evidence presented in this section support that ADAPT-CAGE is able to correctly distinguish between CAGE enriched regions associated to transcription initiation events from noise. However, even though ADAPT-CAGE exhibits very high levels of precision, the performance in terms of sensitivity seems to be lagging behind in this analysis. In general, every unsupervised learning strategy inherently produces results with increased within-cluster variability and k-means is not the optimal algorithm for dealing with non-linearity. In addition, the lower le http://www.msu.edu/ vels of sensitivity could also be explained by the limitations of the experimental methods used to produce the genome-wide histone occupancy and the inability to detect lowly expressed regions due to the selected sequencing depth. In any case, the unsupervised strategy presented here provides only a rough estimate of ADAPT-CAGE’s performance. In the following sections, we present more results from benchmarking strategies based on additional experimental evidence and the annotation of the human genome as well as performance comparisons with existing algorithms. The number of total predictions for each algorithm are listed in Supplementary Table 1. For the remaining evaluation approaches, an ADAPT-CAGE score cutoff of 0.9 was utilized, unless stated otherwise (i.e. the application of multiple score cutoffs for generating curves). The threshold of 0.9 was selected after observing the desired balance between precision and sensitivity (data not shown).